Include plugins in the architecture diagrams (#36513)
mistercrunch/Airflow: docs/apache-airflow/core-concepts/overview.rst

Architecture Overview
=====================

Airflow is a platform that lets you build and run *workflows*. A workflow is represented as a
:doc:`DAG <dags>` (a Directed Acyclic Graph), and contains individual pieces of work called
:doc:`tasks`, arranged with dependencies and data flows taken into account.

.. image:: ../img/edge_label_example.png
  :alt: An example Airflow DAG, rendered in Graph

A DAG specifies the dependencies between Tasks, and the order in which to execute them and run retries;
the Tasks themselves describe what to do, be it fetching data, running analysis, triggering other systems,

> or more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A DAG specifies the dependencies between tasks, which defines the order in which to execute the tasks. Tasks describe what to do, be it fetching data, running analysis, triggering other systems, or more.
```

Small rewording for readability. Retries can also be defined on task-level + I don't think retries are critical to the Airflow architecture so I'd leave it out here.

Author: Nice.

Airflow components

> ------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
------------------

Airflow's architecture consists of multiple components. The following sections describe each component's function and whether they're required for a bare-minimum Airflow installation, or an optional component to achieve better Airflow extensibility, performance, and scalability.
```

It's a best practice not to stack headings. Let's write at least a short descriptive text explaining what's coming.

Author: Agree. Nice description!

Required components
...................

> Minimal Airflow installation consists of the following components:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A minimal Airflow installation consists of the following components:
```

* A :doc:`scheduler <../administration-and-deployment/scheduler>`, which handles both triggering scheduled
  workflows, and submitting :doc:`tasks` to the executor to run. The :doc:`executor <executor/index>`, is
  a configuration property of the *scheduler*, not a separate component and runs within the scheduler
  process. There are several executors available out of the box, and you can also write your own.

* A *webserver*, which presents a handy user interface to inspect, trigger and debug the behaviour of
  DAGs and tasks.

> * A folder of *DAG files*, is read by the *scheduler* to figure out what tasks to run and when and to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A folder of *DAG files* is read by the *scheduler* to figure out what tasks to run and when and to
```

  run them.

> * A *metadata database*, used by the *scheduler*, and *webserver* to store state of workflows and tasks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A *metadata database*, used by the *scheduler* and *webserver*, to store state of workflows and tasks.
```

Shouldn't we just say "all Airflow components"?

Author: Nit - to make it future-proof, I just wrote `components`. Not all airflow components are going to use the database in the future (that's the whole point of introducing the internal API). And the images are showing which one are accessing the DB.

  Setting up a metadata database is described in :doc:`/howto/set-up-database` and is required for
  Airflow to work.

Optional components
...................

> There are also some optional components that are not present in the basic installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some Airflow components are optional and can enable better extensibility, scalability, and performance in your Airflow:
```

Would explain _why_ they're optional here.

Author: Nice.

* Optional *worker*, which executes the tasks given to it by the scheduler. In the basic installation
  worker might be part of the scheduler not a separate component. It can be run as a long running process
  in the :doc:`CeleryExecutor <executor/celery>`, or as a POD in the
  :doc:`KubernetesExecutor <executor/kubernetes>`.

> * Optional *triggerer*, which executes deferred tasks in an async-io event loop. In basic installation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optional *triggerer*, which executes deferred tasks in an asyncio event loop. In a basic installation
```

>   where deferred tasks are not used, triggerer might not be present. More about deferring tasks can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  where deferred tasks are not used, a triggerer is not necessary. More about deferring tasks can be
```

  found in :doc:`/authoring-and-scheduling/deferring`.

* Optional *dag processor*, which parses DAG files and synchronizes them into the
  *metadata database* in basic installation *dag processor* might be part of the scheduler not

>   a separate component.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optional *dag processor*, which parses DAG files and serializes them into the
  *metadata database*. By default, the *dag processor* process is part of the scheduler, but it can be run as a separate component for scalability reasons.
```

Author: Yes. but also security reasons.

* A folder of *DAG files*, is read by  *dag processor*, *workers* and *triggerer* when they are running.
  If *dag processor* is present *scheduler** does not need to read the *DAG files* directly. More about

>   processing DAG files can be found in :doc:`/authoring-and-scheduling/dagfile-processing`

Reviewer: IMO it's confusing this is mentioned in both the required and optional components. Would leave it only in the required components, because without DAG folder you have no functioning Airflow.

Author: I merged this with **dag processor** paragraph before:

```
* Optional *dag processor*, which parses DAG files and serializes them into the
  *metadata database*. By default, the *dag processor* process is part of the scheduler, but it can
  be run as a separate component for scalability and security reasons. If *dag processor* is present
  *scheduler** does not need to read the *DAG files* directly. More about
  processing DAG files can be found in :doc:`/authoring-and-scheduling/dagfile-processing`
```

* Optional folder of *plugins*. Plugins are a way to extend Airflow's functionality and by placing Python
  files in the plugins folder you can extend Airflow functionality (similarly as via installed packages).
  Plugins are read by the *scheduler*, *dag processor*, *triggerer* and *webserver*. More about

>   plugins can be found in :doc:`/authoring-and-scheduling/plugins`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Optional folder of *plugins*. Plugins are a way to extend Airflow's functionality (similar to installed packages).
  Plugins are read by the *scheduler*, *dag processor*, *triggerer* and *webserver*. More about
  plugins can be found in :doc:`/authoring-and-scheduling/plugins`.
```

Would describe the key message here (what is a plugin), and leave out deployment details.

Author: Agree/

Deploying Airflow components

> ............................

Reviewer: Let's make this header a different style because it's now on the same level as "Required components" and "Optional components".

Author: Wow. This is where "require resolving conversations" turned out to be really helpful. I totally missed these two last comments when I reviewed it few moments ago.

All the components are Python applications that can be deployed using various deployment mechanisms.

> They deployed Python applications can have extra *installed packages* installed in their Python environment.

Reviewer: By "deployed Python applications" you're referring to Airflow components, right?

Author: Removed.

This is useful for example to install custom operators or sensors or extend Airflow functionality with custom
plugins.

While Airflow can be run in a single machine and with simple installation where only *scheduler* and
*webserver* are deployed, Airflow is designed to be scalable and secure, and is able ot run in a distributed
environment - where various components can run on different machines, with different security perimeters
and can be scaled by running multiple instances of the components above. Also while single person can run and
manage Airflow installation, Airflow Deployment in more complex setup can involve various roles of users

> as described in the :doc:`/security/security_model`.

Reviewer: I'm confused about the key message of this paragraph. What is the key message here? "Airflow is scalable"? "Airflow supports roles"?

Author: I split that into three separate paragraphs. - one about scalability one about security and following chapter about roles. I decided for now not to split out separate "roles" document. I just briefly mentioned the roles and described it here, and linked to the "security model" for more details. 

I also moved the following chapter 

```
Airflow itself is agnostic to what you're running - it will happily orchestrate and run anything,
either with high-level support from one of our providers, or directly as a command using the shell
or Python :doc:`operators`.
```

to the top-level description, as it feels that it should be there rather than in the "components" section.

Airflow itself is agnostic to what you're running - it will happily orchestrate and run anything,
either with high-level support from one of our providers, or directly as a command using the shell
or Python :doc:`operators`.

Architecture Diagrams
---------------------

The diagrams below show different ways to deploy Airflow - gradually from the simple "one machine" and
single person deployment, to a more complex deployment with separate components, separate user roles and
finally with more isolated security perimeters.

The meaning of the different connection types in the diagrams below is as follows:

* **brown solid lines** represent *DAG files* submission and synchronization
* **blue solid lines** represent deploying and accessing *installed packages* and *plugins*
* **black dashed lines** represent control flow of workers by the *scheduler* (via executor)
* **black solid lines** represent accessing the UI to manage execution of the workflows
* **red dashed lines** represent accessing the *metadata database* by all components

Basic Airflow deployment
........................

This is the simplest deployment of Airflow, usually operated and managed on a single

> machine. Such deployment usually uses Local Executor, where the *scheduler* and the *workers* are in

Reviewer: Could you add a link to the local executor here?

Author: Absolutely.

the same component and the *DAG files* are read directly from the local filesystem by the *scheduler*
and there is no separate *triggerer* to run deferred tasks and *webserver* runs on the same machine

> as the *scheduler*.

Reviewer: Let's break this sentence up into multiple sentences. How about:

```suggestion
machine. Such a deployment usually uses the LocalExecutor, where the *scheduler* and the *workers* are in
the same Python process and the *DAG files* are read directly from the local filesystem by the *scheduler*.
The *webserver* runs on the same machine as the *scheduler*.
```

Author: yep. I also added a separate  sentence explaining that there is no tirggerrer so taask deferral is not possible (task deferral is mentioned above and linked to the documentation).

> Such installation typically does not separate user roles - deployment, configuration, operation, authoring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such an installation typically does not separate user roles - deployment, configuration, operation, authoring
```

and maintenance are all done by the same person and there are no security perimeters between the components.

.. image:: ../img/diagram_basic_airflow_architecture.png

If you want to run Airflow on a single machine in a simple single-machine setup, you can skip the
more complex diagrams below and go straight to the :ref:`overview:workloads` section.

Distributed Airflow architecture
................................

This is the architecture of Airflow where components of Airflow are distributed among multiple machines
and where various roles of users are introduced - **Deployment Manager**, **DAG author**,
**Operations User**. You can read more about those various roles in the :doc:`/security/security_model`.

> In case of distributed deployment, it is much more important to consider security aspects of the components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of a distributed deployment, it is important to consider the security aspects of the components.
```

The *webserver* does not have access to the *DAG files* directly (the code you see in the Code tab of the
UI is synchronized via the *metadata database*). This way the *webserver* cannot execute any
code submitted by **DAG author**. It can only execute code that is installed as *installed packages* or
*plugins* by the **Deployment Manager**. Also the **Operations User** has only access to the UI and can

> only trigger DAGs and tasks, but cannot author DAGs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *webserver* does not have access to the *DAG files* directly. The code in the Code tab of the
UI is read from the *metadata database*. The *webserver* cannot execute any code submitted by the **DAG author**. It can only execute code that is installed as an *installed package* or *plugin* by the **Deployment Manager**. The **Operations User** only has access to the UI and can only trigger DAGs and tasks, but cannot author DAGs.
```

The *DAG files* need to be synchronized between all the components that use them - *scheduler*,
*triggerer* and *workers*. The *DAG files* can be synchronized by various mechanisms - for example by

> using a shared filesystem, or by using a version control system like Git.

Reviewer: > or by using a version control system like Git

I think that doesn't cover the full message - the user needs to set up Git sync for that to work.

Author: I removed specific mentioning of the mechanisms - instead I linked to our helm-chart's `managing-dag-files` document that explains all the various options:

```
The *DAG files* need to be synchronized between all the components that use them - *scheduler*,
*triggerer* and *workers*. The *DAG files* can be synchronized by various mechanisms - typical
ways how DAGs can be synchronized are described in :doc:`helm-chart:manage-dag-files` ot our
Helm Chart documentation. Helm chart is one of the ways how to deploy Airflow in K8S cluster.
```

Basic airflow architecture
--------------------------

This is the basic architecture of Airflow that you'll see in simple installations.

Note that even in the simple installation, Airflow Webserver does not access the DAG files directly
(the code you see in the Code tab of the UI is synchronized via the metadata database).

This is to allow for a more secure deployment, where the webserver has never the need or even
possibility to executed code submitted by DAG authors, the only custom code that webserver can

> execute are the plugins and those should be only installed and deployed by the Airflow Deployment Manager.

Reviewer: Would leave this out.

Author: This is a source of major confusion. Many our users still think that webserver accesses the DAG files and needs it even 3 years  after releasing Airflow 2. I've been answering at least 10 times to our users that this is not the case as they still continued to deploy Airflow webserver WITH DAG folder even if this was useless.

I believe we failed to communicate that - that's why I added it here.

Author: Thought a bit and I think I will simply add much simpler diagram very much like the original one - showing "self-contained" installation - without workers and triggerers and with single user and make it the first diagram - with explanation that this is the simplest configuration and explaination that it only serves very basic installation. This way the diagrams will get gradually more complex  and showing "true" nature of some of the decisions made, while not confusing the users who **just** want to start their journey with Airflow.

I believe that will satisfy both - your desire @BasPH  to have things simple and my desire to use the architecture diagrams of ours to explain some design decisions we have and to explain those who are looking for self-deployment of Airflow and want to understand our intentions.

WDYT?

Reviewer 2: I agree with @potiuk - but maybe this is currently also in the light of many security reviews. If no agreement, then the reasoning can be shortened a bit.

Author: OK. Let me know @BasPH and @jscheffl what you think now. We should - of course - tweak it still a bit (better icons as discussed below and possibly play a bit with graphviz/diagram layout to add some margins and get it a bit more readable. Plus I can add a few links to other parts of the documentation when I am mentioning other pieces - to get it all nicely hyperlinked. 

But I **think** this one might achieve good balance between the simplicity and being able to explain concepts and architecture in "gradually more complex" ways - without overloading the users who just want to install airflow and use it locally.

Author: I **think** this might be resolved - please reopen if you think it's not.

Reviewer: @potiuk Sounds good. It's not my goal to keep things simple per se. However, I do think we should introduce complex topics more gradually, one concept at a time. A piece of text, or an image, becomes difficult to comprehend if multiple previously unmentioned concepts are introduced at the same time to the reader.

So starting with a bare minimum diagram, and then saying "here's how a more complex setup might look like" is indeed a good approach to introduce the reader to a complex topic.

.. image:: ../img/diagram_basic_airflow_architecture.png

Note that executor is only briefly mentioned as a link between Scheduler and workers.
The executors will generally also introduce other components to let them talk to their workers -
like a task queue - but you can still think of the executor and its workers as a single logical
component in Airflow overall, handling the actual task execution - where executor is controlled by the

> scheduler.

Reviewer: What is the key message here?

Author: I actually think of removing executor completely from that image. For all practical. purposes executor as component does not exist, it's merely a configuration parameter of scheduler and nowhere in "deployment architecture"  executor is needed (it was there however in the original diagram). I will try to remove it (including the whole paragraph here and let's see if that is going to be better

Author: I removed this chapter altogether.

Airflow itself is agnostic to what you're running - it will happily orchestrate and run anything,

> either with high-level support from one of our providers, or directly as a command using the shell

Reviewer: Would add links here to the providers packages and specific operators mentioned.

Author: Yeah. Good idea.

Author: Added more links to specific docs in the overview.
